Good afternoon.
I'm Malcolm Crawford.
I work for Developer Publications.
Welcome to Migrating
to Modern Objective-C.
Consider an unfortunate developer
who tragically went into a coma
in 2005 at the height of his game.
Miraculously, a few weeks ago,
he came to.
It wasn't miraculous that he came to,
it was miraculous that he managed
to come to at exactly the right
moment to get a WWDC ticket.
So, he's here now, and obviously,
as he regained consciousness,
many thoughts went through his mind,
but eventually,
he came to the really important issues.
What's happened to Objective-C?
Why?
And perhaps most importantly,
how do I use it?
So, in addition to just
thinking of Rip Van and S.
Winkle,
think about this yourselves as well,
as you're looking at code that you
might have had for the better part
of a decade or more that might be
improved in some way or another.
The agenda is as follows.
To start,
we'll consider a bit of philosophy.
Think about why it is that
some things have changed.
Then we'll just start looking
at code to see what code you
might have written some time ago,
what we'd expect you to do now, and why.
So,
to start off with some of the philosophy,
Objective-C certainly has evolved.
Originally,
it was just a thin layer atop of C.
Now, it is still atop C,
but there's much more to it.
It's certainly not such
a thin layer anymore.
If you sort of start looking at some
of the things that RIP might look at,
there's a whole load of other
features that have come into play,
different patterns and
that sort of thing.
In general, and you might have seen
this slide elsewhere before,
this fits in with our general
evolution of Objective-C as a language.
Starting from pure C,
we've added object orientation
on top and these other features
to progress it in the direction
of making it simpler and safer.
Together with these
changes in the language,
then, have come changes in the way
that we use the language,
the way that we use the environment,
and so on.
In particular, then,
some of the conventions
that we use have evolved.
And this is really important because
Cocoa has very strong conventions.
You know pretty quickly if somebody
isn't following the right conventions.
We talk about fighting
the framework and so on.
In general, again,
we hope that the new features
are making your code simpler,
more compact, and so on,
in addition to being safer.
But we're also moving in the direction,
then, of building some of the conventions
that previously you just had to know
about actually into the language.
And in particular,
into the language so that you
don't have to think about them.
The philosophical coder here,
a quote from Bertrand
Russell's thesis supervisor.
You don't get much more philosophical.
in that.
The goal is to reduce
the number of mundane,
repetitive things that
you have to consider,
so that you can concentrate
on the interesting code that
differentiates your application.
So, by way of warming up,
a couple of trivial little aspects.
Importing headers, fairly mundane thing,
but you might see, from a while back,
code that looks like this.
You might import individual headers
files for individual classes.
You might forward declare
classes and so on,
possibly in some effort to make things
easier for the compiler or whatever.
Don't do that.
It doesn't actually make
things easier for the compiler.
The appropriate thing to do now
is simply import the umbrella
header for the framework.
Straightforward enough,
it also reduces then the cognitive
load on you in maintaining
the list of import statements.
So, trivial start.
That all came into play a while back,
something much more recent,
and again a small change,
but a useful one.
Enums of fixed underlying type.
Historically,
we might have had enums that
were declared rather like this.
standard C.
We tried to make things rather better by
indicating their type with a type def.
But this doesn't give you an
awful lot of help when you are
actually writing your code.
Adopting the new pattern means you
actually get compiler help or Xcode
help with code completion and so on.
So you can be guaranteed then that the
constant that you use in a particular
situation is an appropriate one.
So small but useful increment.
Moving on to rather bigger issues and
perhaps rather more contentious issues.
Accessor methods.
Start off by looking at the
use of accessor methods.
In this example,
you can see that following
appropriate conventions,
we're using the accessor
method for the area property.
This is appropriate.
Almost certainly,
given what we'll see in a moment,
the area property is a derived property.
If you try to access it directly,
it won't exist.
Have a look, though,
at the surrounding context.
There are memory management methods.
Dealing with memory management methods
in this scenario is almost certainly
going to lead to problems at some stage.
You'll forget to put a method in,
put an extra method in, or whatever.
Using accessor methods
pervasively gives you safer code.
You're less likely to make a mistake.
Moreover, it's the appropriate thing to
do for following encapsulation.
You don't necessarily know what the side
effects might be of any accessor method.
Using accessor methods pervasively
insulates you from those.
Quick aside,
I said we were doing contentious.
It's also possible to
use dot syntax in these.
That's as much as I'm going to say.
Personal preference.
Having used square brackets for a
little bit more than two decades now,
I'm actually fine with .syntax,
but personal preference.
If you don't like it, don't use it.
The important thing is
always use accessor methods,
except -- and we'll come
back to this in a bit -- in
initializer methods and dialog.
Another favorite subject,
memory management.
We just touched on that in the preceding.
Memory management has
always been a thorny issue.
I'll abide by my own dictum
of not repeating the rules.
I hope you will appreciate, though,
that the code shown here
does abide by the rules.
So does this code.
Choosing between them is more
stuff for you to think about.
Hopefully, though, if you're sufficiently
familiar with the rules,
it becomes second nature,
and you don't think about it too much
until you get to a situation like this.
If you start removing objects
from a collection and using them,
now you're not necessarily sure
of the lifetime of that object.
This is a pattern that perhaps over time,
and with a certain amount of debugging,
you get to recognize.
And you realize then that
this is the sort of thing that
you've got to do in response.
You must make sure that you claim
ownership of any object that
you pull out of a collection,
and then relinquish ownership
after you've finished using it.
Great.
Okay, so you learned that.
Next up, though, we get to a slightly
more complex situation.
I'll leave a second or two if anybody
can see what the problem is there.
It's a little bit more tricky
just to follow through there.
It actually follows pretty much, though,
the same pattern as before.
The solution to all of these is
simply to switch over to Arc.
Two other sessions to look at,
one we did yesterday, the other tomorrow,
to look at adopting Arc.
If you adopt Arc,
all of the code that you write
simply works as it should do,
without you having to think about it.
Modulo, perhaps.
Interaction with Core Foundation.
Core Foundation is still a little bit
problematic in that you might have to
put in casts to indicate to the compiler
what the memory management semantics are,
whether you're transferring
ownership or whatever.
In general, a better solution,
if you can find it,
is to not use Core Foundation objects
in the first place.
In the case of this example,
instead of CFUUID, we now have NSUUID.
So,
elevate things to Objective-C objects,
if you can.
A quick aside on that, in general,
there's a certain amount of lore
about why you might want to use
Core Foundation-style objects
rather than Objective-C objects.
Most of that is just now lore.
There is no reason, really,
certainly in terms of
performance and so on,
to prefer CF-style objects
over Objective-C objects.
One of the things that Arc doesn't
prevent you from doing is a sort of thing
that you were able to do before Arc,
and that's create retain cycles,
or as we call them now,
strong reference cycles.
The answer is still exactly
the same as you had before,
to use an appropriate pattern to include,
for example, weak references.
Weak references include, say,
from child back to parent objects,
delegate objects, data source objects,
and so on, should typically be weak.
So follow the same patterns that
you would have followed if you were
using manual memory management.
Now to a rather bigger subject
for a variety of reasons.
If we have a look at properties,
this is one case where I'll give
a sort of big before and after.
Here's code that you or Rip might
have written back in 2005.
As code, it's fine.
The left-hand side actually
shows the complete declaration
of a putative thing class.
The right-hand side shows the beginning
of the implementation of the thing class.
As you can see, that pretty much fills
up the whole slide,
and there's a lot of
implementation missing.
What we're aiming for is this:
I hope everyone will agree
that there's less code.
Trick question.
It's also, hopefully,
rather more approachable.
We've got a very clear contract
expressed in the interface,
and almost nothing then to
write in the implementation.
Let's drill down into that in detail.
Start off with the instance variables.
Historically,
you might have declared the instance
variables in the interface of a class.
The trouble with this is that this
is exposing what's really a private
implementation detail of the class.
There's no reason why anybody
who's actually using your class
needs to know what the instance
variables are that it uses.
Moreover,
it's just space that's taken up in your
interface for people to read past to
get to the actual interesting stuff.
You can now,
if you absolutely need to declare
instance variables independently,
move those to the implementation block.
So put instance variable declarations
in the @implementation block
hidden away in your .m file.
Better still,
you can use the instance variables
don't declare instance variables at all,
and we'll come back to that
in the subject of properties,
or the declared properties, in a moment.
Next up,
the accessor method declarations.
Again, code that would have been
perfectly fine a decade or so ago,
now we can do rather better.
If we start off with
the title declaration,
there's two lines of code there.
We can do rather better
in a single line of code,
rather more expressive.
You just use a declared property
to replace the two lines of the
access and method declarations.
We can actually go a little
bit further than that,
though.
Usually, with value-style properties,
you actually want your object
to have a private copy of those.
So, simply adding a copy attribute
indicates then that this -- whatever
value -- if a new value is passed in,
it's going to be copied
rather than simply owned.
Concentrate next on the radius.
Again, we can do a similar thing.
straightforward replacement
of the two accessor methods.
We're left, though,
with the declaration of
the derived property.
Because it's still a
characteristic of the object,
it's reasonable then to replace that with
A Property Declaration as well.
Now, the audience participation part.
What's wrong with this?
They survived through a lot of revisions.
The default declaration
of a property is atomic.
So, strictly speaking,
since a property declaration
represents a contract,
we should add the non-atomic decorator.
Because our implementation,
that I skipped past rather
quickly perhaps earlier,
of the area method was not atomic.
Switch then to delegate.
Again,
follow the same sort of thing as before,
but following conventions,
we can now actually specify,
as part of a declared contract,
that our relationship to the
delegate is going to be weak.
That goes through the
method declarations,
turning then to the implementation
of the accessor methods.
Again,
a subject that caused endless debate on
various mailing lists over the years.
What's the right implementation
of an accessor method?
Most of the debates ended up missing the
simple fact there isn't any one right
implementation of an accessor method.
Exactly how you implement it
depends on what it is that the
accessor method is intended to do.
For example, whether you want to copy
a value that's passed in.
Given the contract that you specify
in the declared property now,
you can ask the compiler to come up with
the appropriate implementation of the
accessor method to meet the specification
that you gave in the declared property.
So, we can represent... We can
replace the entire implementation
of the accessor method simply
with a synthesize statement.
One of the things that's been
a little bit in transition,
though, and another thing that's
been subject of law,
generally,
we would actually now encourage
you to prepend instance variable
names with an underscore.
Now,
let's just clarify something about this.
This is an instance variable name,
not accessor method name.
Apple does reserve underscore
prefix for accessor method names,
not, however,
for instance variable names.
The reason for prepending an instance
variable name with an underscore is to
try to dissuade people from accessing
the instance variable directly.
Remember what I said about using
accessor methods pervasively?
This is to help people in that direction.
As a quick tangent on this,
one of the most common mistakes,
one of the most common reasons for
errors with core data applications
over the years turns out to have
been because people have been trying
to access the managed object context
directly using the instance variable.
And lo and behold,
it's actually not initialized yet,
so they're accessing a nil value.
Prepending the instance
variable name with an underscore
helps mitigate that problem.
We're actually going a stage further now,
though, with the most recent compiler.
Using auto-synthesize, we do one better,
and...
it just goes away completely.
So, declare the property
and you're done with it.
Switching to a slightly different area,
but still under the general
heading of properties,
in some situations you might want
your object to maintain private state.
It's not supposed to be
accessed by any other object.
Putting it into the @interface
declaration is clearly then
not the right thing to do.
That's an open invitation then
to people to meddle with it.
What you can do is, first of all,
replace that with a property declaration.
You can, though,
move the instance variable declaration
to the implementation block,
as suggested earlier,
better still actually provide
a property for that as well.
Notice in this case,
the property is declared
in a class extension.
So the class extension you are
able to hide away in your .m file.
So, takeaway message:
If you want to keep private state,
maintain private state,
use a class extension
hidden away in the .m file.
A similar thing might
have applied to methods,
private methods that
you wanted to declare.
In order to keep the compiler
happy and avoid complaints about
missing method declarations,
you might in the past have had to declare
methods in a category in your .m file.
The problem with this is now you
have to keep this up to date.
You might actually change your
method name somewhere along the line,
and now what you've declared in your
private category is out of sync with
what you've actually implemented.
A possible way of getting around that
is to then use a class extension.
This way,
the compiler will actually tell you,
at least,
if you haven't provided an implementation
of the methods that you've promised it.
Better still,
Again, actually using the latest
version of the compiler,
you don't need to provide a
forward declaration of methods.
The compiler will be able
to find them for you anyway.
So the benefit here is less
work again for you to do in
maintaining the private category,
maintaining the class extension,
keeping the declared methods in sync with
the methods you've actually implemented.
So less work for you to do.
Further in the direction of
state maintenance and properties,
outlets.
Historically,
given the strong conventions that we had,
outlets were the least well-specified,
least well-understood aspect, perhaps,
of our entire interface.
There is nothing in the traditional
declaration of an outlet that
tells you anything about its
memory management semantics.
There's nothing that says how
you're expected to use it,
whether it's supposed to
be a strong reference,
a weak reference, and so on.
It's also, again,
exposing a private implementation detail.
It shouldn't matter to any other
object what outlets you have.
Instead...
Now use a property declaration that makes
the memory management semantics explicit.
At the moment, to help with tool support,
you might well make these
declarations in the interface block.
In the future, what we'd actually-- a
big one-- in the .h file,
in the implement interface
block in the .h file.
In the future,
what we're actually probably likely
to do is to move that into a--
Private Class Extension,
again in the .m file.
The reason for this is,
for the most part,
the outlets that you declare are likely
to be a private implementation detail
of your view controller or whatever.
Obviously, there may be some that
you need to expose,
but in general,
whatever clients your view controller
has should be passing information,
data or whatever,
to the view controller directly,
rather than accessing the outlets.
Consider also whether you want a weak
or a strong reference in general.
Outlets to subviews of a
view controller's main view,
or to a window controller's window,
are likely to be weak.
It's the main view or the window that
is expected to manage the lifetime
of the views contained within it.
Outlets to top-level objects,
such as the main view itself or
a window controller's window,
should be strong.
Switching to other things that
weren't particularly tidy in the past,
a variety of different ways
have been used over the years
of implementing init methods.
Here's one example.
Historically,
we might have invoked the superclass's
designated initializer and done a
test to see if you got a value return.
More recent implementations
of the compiler actually
provided a warning on this,
so we changed that then to add an
additional pair of parentheses,
just to confuse people
who looked at it and said,
"This is clearly a mistake,
isn't it?" No,
it was to keep the compiler happy.
Instead, adopt now the -- oh,
I beg your pardon.
There was another thing to call out here.
Also notice, typically in the past,
you've used accessor methods
to initialize values in
an initializer method.
Again, don't want to do that.
In an initializer method,
the state of your object is not defined.
It hasn't been fully initialized yet.
To be safe, therefore,
don't invoke accessor methods.
Simply set property values
directly if you need to.
And then this is a new pattern that
we recommend for the implementation
of the initializer method itself.
For dialog, again,
historically you might well
have used accessor methods.
The object during a dialog method is
in the process of being torn down.
Its state is not fully determined.
So don't use accessor
methods in the dialog either.
Message the instance variable directly.
Ideally, of course, if you use Arc,
you don't have to worry
about this at all anyway.
Moving away from properties onto
a different subject entirely,
something that's somewhat small,
but in some respects rather profound.
Protocols.
Protocols provide a mechanism for
formalizing communication channels.
Imagine, for example,
that you're hiring a butler,
as I'm sure many of you are.
butlers, as I'm sure you're aware,
have a variety of roles or tasks
that you might want them to perform.
Obviously,
they need to be able to make tea,
serve sandwiches.
A rather unusual thing that you might ask
a butler to do would be to mow the lawn.
If you had a reference to
a butler as a property,
You might then want to impose
your will on the butler and say,
"If you used a formal protocol,
you're specifying then that
the butler must mow the lawn."
That's a rather heavy imposition.
It might be rather difficult
to get a butler that's also
willing to mow the lawn.
To sort of work around that,
we introduced the idea
of -- historically,
there'd been the idea
of informal protocols.
An informal protocol is simply a
list of methods that are declared
on a category of NSObject.
The problem here is instead
of being overly specific,
now we're under-specific, as it were.
We haven't sufficiently well
specified what we're actually
expecting the butler to do.
The only thing that we can say is
the butler is likely to be an object.
We're not actually making
any demands of them at all,
or specifying the sorts of tasks that
we're actually expecting of them.
The advance that was made
with protocols was to add
optional methods in a protocol.
Now we can say we are going
to require our butler to make
tea and serve sandwiches.
It's up to them, however,
whether they're willing to mow the lawn,
which puts far less constraints
on the sort of object then that
we're expecting to be a butler,
but also still allows us to be
quite specific in our expectations.
So, again, we're getting a much clearer
establishment of an API contract here.
So, any places where in your code at the
moment you might be using an informal
protocol to provide a list of methods,
now move across to using formal
protocols with optional methods,
if appropriate.
Places where these
particularly come into play,
you'll have seen these in data
source and delegate methods,
particularly in table views and so on,
on both platforms.
On iOS in particular,
you might have seen these used
as a communication channel
between a view controller and
its parent view controller.
So you're encouraged to use
formal protocols to define the
communication channel between view
controllers in an iOS application.
Other smaller but hopefully -- I believe,
actually, welcome features that save
an awful lot on typing,
the new support for
collections and literals.
Historically, you'd have written code
that looks like this.
rather long-winded code to
create a number as an object,
to create a dictionary or an array,
other collections and so on.
If you're creating an
array or a dictionary,
two problems.
First of all, you have to remember to
end your list with nil.
The compiler actually reminds
you now if you make that mistake.
Secondly, if you're creating a
dictionary specifically,
you have to remember to put your
keys and values in the wrong order.
I suspect that most people have
discovered now that the compiler now
supports number and collection literals,
Which considerably reduce the amount
of code that you have to write,
and again make it safer,
in that there's no requirement now to
terminate your initializer with a nil,
and you get to put your,
in the case of the dictionary,
Keys and values in the right order.
Just one example that I was
particularly happy with myself,
this came out of a sample
code that I was updating,
and so the code went from this to this.
Oh, an applaud.
Thank you.
I'll take that on behalf
of the compiler team.
So thank you very much to them
for providing these features.
There are additional features.
So subscripting then makes some
of the other code that you might
have written to deal with arrays
and dictionaries rather easier.
So extracting values and replacing
values become rather easier,
and hopefully the syntax is more
amenable to people coming from
other environments and so on.
So arrays and dictionaries.
I certainly find it easier now
to use the latter in the case of
setting a value for the dictionary.
The compiler team also provided,
a while back,
better ways of enumerating over
the contents of collections.
Historically, you might have written
rubbish code like this.
In particular,
this tends to crop up a lot,
invoking count on each
time around the array,
which isn't very good.
But you're still left,
even when you do that properly,
you have to hoist out a
separate count variable.
You're still left within the
body of the enumeration with the
task of actually pulling out the
value that you're interested in.
Any code that you see
Like that,
replace now with fast enumeration.
As the name suggests, first of all,
it's fast.
It's also a more compact syntax.
It saves you from having to declare
local variables separately and so on.
So, in addition to being more compact,
it's also considerably more efficient.
However, potentially in some situations,
The for-in syntax,
the fast enumeration syntax,
may not be quite as general as you want.
There are some situations in which you
want a little bit more flexibility.
It's also perhaps sometimes
a little bit difficult to add
support for fast enumeration
to your own classes and so on.
To address that and other issues,
we now have blocks.
To illustrate that,
consider what you might have used in the
past to sort the contents of an array.
Historically, you might have used sorted
arrays using function and passed
in a reference to a function.
The problem here is now you have
a reference to a function that you
have to implement somewhere else,
outside of the scope of the
actual use of that sort operation.
So somewhere you have to think about,
well, what did I actually want
to do in that context?
How do I implement sort function?
And especially if you actually want to
make use of any contextual information,
you've got to pass that in through
a rather unpleasant void star.
Instead,
You can now use the-- you should
now use the block-based API
Which has the advantage
then of being in place.
You get to implement the sort function
exactly where it is that you're using it.
If we go back to the issue of
enumerating the contents of the array,
it also
means that you have access to
additional local information,
like the actual index.
of the object that you're looking at.
So if for some reason you need
to actually get at the index of
the item that you're looking at,
you have access to that now
within the block as well.
This is particularly handy
in the case of dictionaries.
With a dictionary,
the fast enumeration gave you all
of the keys in the dictionary.
It was still up to you, however,
to extract the corresponding objects.
If you switch this over to
using the block-based API,
you're conveniently given both key
and object at the same time without
having to do additional work.
A place where blocks have had a
somewhat more profound impact still
is in what you might call callbacks.
If you consider the way that you
might use a notification center,
historically,
you'd have added an object as an observer
and told the notification center the
name of the method that you want to be
invoked if this notification occurs.
First of all, that's error-prone.
You must make sure that you get
the name of your selector correct.
Secondly, again,
you're left with the problem of having
to implement the method somewhere else,
outside of the context of
where you're actually using it.
Better now, switch that code over to
using the block-based API.
With a block-based API,
you get to implement the
callback in exactly this place
that you actually use it.
Moreover, again,
because it's block-based,
you get to use any additional
contextual information that you wanted.
As a bonus,
One of the perennial problems
with notifications was getting
notifications on a queue or thread that
you weren't expecting to get them on.
With block-based API, you get to say,
I want to have this delivered to me on,
typically, the main queue,
the main thread.
So if you need to update
the user interface,
you get it on the right place.
Sorry for finishing off on one caveat.
One thing to call out, though,
is be careful in blocks of
capturing strong references to
self and setting up retain cycles.
A pattern you can use here
is to create a local weak
reference to self and use that.
So, to wrap up,
for more information about all of this,
talk to Michael Jurowicz.
There are several sessions,
two of which have already happened.
There is also now a new document
that actually describes -- well,
hopefully everybody is adopting all
of the latest features and using
the latest version of Xcode anyway,
but if you do need to support a
particular version of the tools,
there's now a document that tells
you what features are available in
which particular release of the tools.
The important thing, though,
is adopt these new features.
They'll make your code better
and give you less to type.
Thank you.